# Investigating-the-Role-of-Random-Forest-in-Classifying-Cognitive-Domain-Functionality
Warren Geither, John Yannotty, & Parker Servello; advised by Dil Singhabahu Ph.D; Slippery Rock University

Abstract:
To analyze the effects of ginkgo biloba on cognitive decline, a multi-center study produced neuropsychological (NP) test scores and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data for participants aged 75 or older. Various studies have shown correlation between the exercise of a cognitive domain and increased levels of activity in corresponding regions of the brain. Also, current research strongly suggests the existence of a link between the relative size of these regions and the functionality of the corresponding cognitive domain. The main focus of this study is to apply machine learning techniques to the NP scores and MRI measurements to investigate the relationship between the relative size of brain regions and cognitive domain functionality in the context of the progression of Alzheimer ’s disease. Currently, random forest is the primary method used for discrete classification. In this case, the algorithm generates a set amount of decision trees from a bootstrapped sample in effort to construct a forest that is capable of classifying a patient's cognitive ability. Each node in the tree focuses on a particular prediction variable. Those variables with the highest entropy are selected for the initial levels, as they present the most randomness in the bootstrapped sample. Once completed, variables that indicate cognitive impairment can be identified along with the overall classification performance through the means of a confusion matrix and an out of bag error estimate.  In order to understand machine learning and its appropriateness to investigate this data, machine learning was examined through underlying probability and statistical theory.

Citation:
Warren Geither, Parker Servello, John Yannotty, Dr. D. Singhabahu. “Investigating the Role of Random Forest 
  in Classifying Cognitive Domain Functionality." 2018 Joint Mathematics Meeting, American Mathematical Society, 
  10-13 January 2018, San Diego Convention Center and Marriott Marquis San Diego, CA. Poster Presentation 
